Hi, and
welcome to our second to the last lecture.
This lecture is on Poisson GLNs, and
I should give some credit to Jeff Leek
who I got much of this content from,
from an earlier version of this class.
So modeling count data arises
quite frequently in applications.
For example, the number of calls to
a call center, the number of flu cases.
And in each of these cases, the counts
are unbounded in the sense of well,
there might be some
theoretical bounded account,
the total number of people in the world or
whatever.
However, we don't really know what that
is or that number is really large,
relative to the count
that we're looking at.
So in addition to count, data can come
in the form of rates or proportions,
such as the percentage of people passing
a test, or in terms of rates, think
about the number of cases or something
like that, that occur over a unit of time.
My favorite example is from a nuclear pump
failure experiment where we're looking
at the number of instances that nuclear
pumps failure, per, failed per unit time.
So that would be a rate.
A very common rate that occurs in
bio statistics and public health.
Where I work in is, the so
called incidence rate,
which is the number of newly developed
cases per person time at risk.
Okay so
all of these are instances of counts and
rates and proportions are also
you can think of as counts.
Both because the numerator is a count and
whatever you're dividing by either the
percent time at risk or the total time or
the total sample or the number of
trials or something like that.
That's a second number that we're going
to show you how to deal with as well when
looking at the numerator,
the count part, okay?
And all of these can be
handled with Poisson GLMs.
So the Poisson Distribution is
a useful model for counts and rates.
And again a rate is a count
per some monitoring time.
So, often incidence rates and
web traffic and all these other things
are modeled by Poisson distributions.
A very common use of the Poisson
distribution is approximating binomial
probabilities where the success
probability is very small and the end is
very large, so you can think of that as an
instance of the sort of approximated and
unbounded count,
even though the actual count is bounded.
And then an application that I like quite
a bit is so called Contingency Table data.
So if you have an instance where
you just counted the number of
occurrences of a different
collection of variables.
So if took a random sample of people and
I counted the number of people that
had blonde hair, brown hair and
black hair and I cross tabulated
that with the number of people who had
blue eyes, brown eyes and hazel eyes.
Okay that table of counts is
called a contingency table and
Poisson models are very useful for
modeling contingency table data.
They give a very elegant framework for
doing that.
I give the Poisson mass function here and
so
the rate of counts per unit time is
lambda, whereas t is the total time.
If x is a plus on with this mean,
then its expected value is t times lambda.
So the expected value is plus sign
Is that's is the t times lambda.
So our natural estimate of the rate would
be the count over the total time okay?
So x over t and it's nice to know in
this case that the expected value of
x over t the expected value of our
rate estimate is exactly lambda.
The rate that we would like the estimate.
So, that's the useful property
associated with the Poisson.
The variance is equal to the mean,
so the variance is e lambda.
So that's the assumption of our
model that we can check and
we have some potential
solutions of it's doesn't hold.
And another interesting fact is
the Poisson tends to a normal
as the mean gets large.
So you can think of this in several ways.
All that has to happen is for
t lambda to get large.
This could occur if t is fixed and
lambda gets large, if lambda is fixed and
t gets large, or both of them get large.
And in a lot of different
applications the way in which
the mean gets large could vary but
as long as it gets large in some sense
then the Poisson is going to
approximate a normal distribution.
And here I show you this via simulation.
I simulate three different collections
of Poisson random variables as
the mean of the Poisson distribution
gets larger and larger and
you can see by the right most
panel that it's nearly identical
to a normal distribution at that point.
And then,
we can actually show that we don't, if
this isn't the appropriate class the fact
to show the mathematics that the meaning
of variants are equal theoretically so,
a way could do that by simulation and
I do that here where I right, are not,
I'm sorry this is an access simulation.
We're actually try to show
it using the density and
summing up the density in the right way.
So if you're interested try that
experiment and it will prove to you
that the meaning of variance or equal,
try it for bunch of different scenarios.
Or you could just believe me or
you could take for example mathematical
biostatistics boot camp one or
two are my other course or classes.
Where we cover how to do
the actual mathematics for this.
So as an example,
let's look at Jeff Leek, his web traffic.
So this is his website, www.biostat, or
I'm sorry, biostat.jhsph.edu/~jleek.
And the place I mean in this case is the
interpretive a number of web hits per day.
So our unit our time in this
case is T equal to one.
Now for the one to interpret the length
that we estimate as web hits per hour we
would have to put the T equal 24.
So I hope you understand that and
if you want it to have it to be seconds
you need to put a T equal 24 times or
minutes it would have to be T
equal 24 times 60 and so on.
Let's look at the data I show
here how you can download it and
I convert the date from
a standard character date
time format to a Julian date.
Julian date counts the number of days
since January 1st 1970 I believe.
So the Julian date is nice to think
about because it's just a count.
It's the number of days whereas
the date is kind of a complicated
format because it's characters.
So when you do the head of the date here,
you see the date which
is in character format.
You see the number of visits,
and he is not doing so well.
These early dates with 0
visits on all those dates.
The number of visits that originate from
simply statistics and the julian date.
So here's a plot of the data set.
The Julian date is on the x axis and
the number of visits is on the y axis.
Now, we've covered in the last
lecture what linear regression,
some of the shortfalls of linear
regression is try to model count data or
in that case, binary data.
So let's not just re-hatch that same
topic, there are some issues with
modelling count data as if it was
with a linear model directly.
However, as we saw a couple of slides ago,
as the mean of the counts gets larger and
larger are concerned over
this decreases quite a bit
simply because it's going to
trend to a normal distribution.
So, if you have extremely large counts,
this becomes a lot less objectionable.
So, that's just for notation number of
heads, NH is going to be our outcome JD,
is the Julian day, that's going to be
our predictor and this would be a linear
regression model, we can plot it and
see the fitted line that we would get.
It has some issues.
Clearly there's some curvature there,
maybe we should have put
an x squared term in.
But that would be our first
approach to this, and
honestly it wouldn't be that bad.
But the counts are kind of small, so
it's not the best thing in the world.
The interpretation isn't great for
linear models,
then we'll see some ways which
in the next couple of slides,
how we can tweak linear models to maybe
get a slightly better interpretation.
I think that of counts in web hits and
things like that as things that you would
want to think about on a relative scale
and the linear model really treats
it on a linear additive scale.
So let's think about how we could get
relative interpretations
from our linear model.
The first thing we might try is
taking the log of the outcome,
here I knew the natural log.
And this would be our model,
log of NH is the linear regression model.
B0 + B1(JDi) + ei.
Now let me speak a little bit about
log and what it's accomplishing.
The quantity e to the expected
value of the log of a random
variable is what I would call
the population geometric mean.
And the reason I would call it the
population geometric mean is the empirical
or just geometric mean is
the product of a sample,
product Yi,
raised to the one over n power.
So this the way to think about this,
the product of yi to the one over n power.
If we take a log of that,
we get the arithmatic mean,
the ordinary mean of the log data.
So the geometric mean
is just exponentiating
the arithmatic mean of the log data.
And we know that if we collect a lot
of data, a lot more data in our sample,
the arithmetic mean will
converge to something.
So the geometric mean
is what this quantity,
the product of the data, rays to the one
over nth power, what it converges to.
So, what, it turns out,
when you take the log of the natural log
of the outcome in a linear
regression then, your exponentiated
coefficients are interpretable
with respect to geometric means.
So, for example, E to the Beta of zero is
the estimated geometric mean hits on day
zero and I should reiterate the point
from earlier on in the class.
This intercept doesn't mean that much
because January first 1970 is not
a date that we care about in
terms of number of web hits.
So probably to make the intercept more
interpretable, what we should have done is
subtracted off the earliest date that we
saw and started counting days from there.
From all of the remaining
days in our data set and
then the intercept would be the e to
the inner estimated intercept would be
the geometric mean hits on
the first day of this data set.
Okay.
So that's a small point but
it doesn't change the fitted model.
It doesn't change the slope or anything
like that to shift around the intercept
however nonetheless, if you want
an interpretable intercept as we know
from earlier on in the class,
you have to do something like that.
E to the beta1 on the other hand is
the estimated relative increase or
decrease in the geometric
mean hits per day, okay?
So the increase per day.
So I should also mention
there's a problem with logs.
If you have zero counts you have to do
something because you can't take the log
of zero, so you need to add a constant.
A very common constant that is plus one.
So we do log of the outcome plus one.
So if we do that, here I fit the linear
model to the log of the outcome plus one
versus the Julian date.
We get the intercept which is kind of
irrelevant in this case as we talked
about before.
And then we get 1.002.
This is on the exponentiated scale.
Okay so
what that means is our model is estimating
a 0.2% increase in web traffic per day.
Okay?
And that's a nice interpretation.
If you added other
covariates then that would
be 0.02% increase per day holding
the other covariates fixed.